---
title: "[MS-WININTBLOGLP]: December 2022"
description: "The following documents were published with active errata or servicing release updates during December 2022. Errata are content issues in"
---

# December 2022

<p> </p>
<p>The following documents were published with active errata or
servicing release updates during December 2022. Errata are content issues in
published versions of protocol documents that could impact an implementation.</p>

<p><b>2022/12/12 service release</b></p>

<ul><li><p><span><span> 
</span></span><span><a href="/openspecs/windows_protocols/MS-WINERRATA/8f7f93d1-4527-4945-9e14-437f90e22149">[MS-PAC]:
Privilege Attribute Certificate Data Structure</a></span>: This document has
been updated to mitigate RC4 vulnerabilities as follows:</p>

<ul><li><p><span><span>  </span></span>2.4
PAC_INFO_BUFFER: Added new required ulType 0x00000013 for Extended KDC
(privilege server) checksum buffer. Additional checksum buffers are to be
ignored.</p>

</li><li><p><span><span>  </span></span>2.8.1
Server Signature: Added that the server signature MUST be generated AFTER the
extended KDC signature.</p>

</li><li><p><span><span>  </span></span>2.8.3
Ticket Signature: Added the extended KDC signature in the recompute list.</p>

</li><li><p><span><span>  </span></span>2.8.4
Extended KDC Signature: Added new section, used to detect tampering of PACs by
parties other than the KDC. When a ticket is altered as during renewal the KDC
SHOULD verify the integrity of the existing signatures and recompute the ticket
signature, server signature, KDC signature, and extended KDC signature in the
PAC.</p>

</li></ul></li></ul><p>Also during December 2022, the following document was
republished with revisions made for service updates.</p>

<p><b>2022/12/01 document release</b></p>

<ul><li><p><span><span> 
</span></span><span><a href="/openspecs/windows_protocols/MS-KILE/2a32282e-dd48-4ad9-a542-609804b02cc9">[MS-KILE]:
Kerberos Protocol Extensions</a></span>: This document has been updated to
mitigate RC4 vulnerabilities as follows:</p>

<ul><li><p><span><span>  </span></span>To
mitigate RC4 vulnerabilities the following changes were made.</p>

</li><li><p><span><span>  </span></span>Added
AES256-CTS-HMAC-SHA1-96-SK to section 2.2.7 Supported Encryption Types Bit Flags.</p>

</li><li><p><span><span>  </span></span>Replaced
SHOULD with MUST support the AES encryption types and removed RC4-HMAC-EXP [24]
in section 3.1.5.2 Encryption Types.</p>

</li><li><p><span><span>  </span></span>Removed
RC4 support in section 5.1.5 DES Downgrade Protection.</p>

</li></ul></li></ul>
                